# Macbeth - Summary of Act 3
#Summary #English 

## Act 3, Scene 1

---

Banquo is suspicious of Macbeth, but he remembers the witches’ prophecies. He looks forward to their prophecies about him being fulfilled. Macbeth and his wife are now king and queen of Scotland. They have invited Banquo to be the guest of honour at a feast to be held that night. Banquo tells Macbeth that he and his son Fleance intend riding that afternoon and do not expect to return to the castle until after dark.

Banquo privately expresses his suspicions of Macbeth and his hopes for his own descendants. Macbeth tells him about the feast to be held that evening and they discuss Banquo’s plans to ride that afternoon. When alone (soliloquy), Macbeth reflects on his fear of Banquo,s then persuades two murderers to kill Banquo and Fleance.

### Banquo’s Suspicions

---

In the opening soliloquy of this first scene, Banquo voices the first explicit suggestion that Macbeth murdered Duncan. (The fact that Banquo is the first to suspect Macbeth of the crime could be another way that Shakespeare flatters King James I.) In doing so, Banquo also considers that because the witches’ predictions for Macbeth have come true (regardless of the hand Macbeth played in making them happen), their prediction for him might come true as well. Although Banquo may be flirting with temptation here, he never mentions his intention to commit any nefarious deeds. His words merely indicate that he might hope to be the father of a line of kings. Macbeth interrupts Banquo’s musings, so we never actually learn the full extent of his thoughts. The discussion between Macbeth and Banquo is tense. A chasm now lies between them — a coldness is evident in their speech. In particular, note Banquo’s line to Macbeth in which he calls him “your highness” and speaks of the “indissoluble” tie between them (15–17). How might an actor deliver this line? Earlier in the play, there was discussion concerning the disjunction between a person’s face and his heart. Does Banquo’s face represent his heart here? Banquo seems to suspect that Macbeth plans further wrongdoing. His answers to Macbeth’s questions are vague and, though seemingly accurate, do not provide any substantial information.

### Violence leads to Violence

---

After Banquo leaves, Macbeth delivers his third soliloquy. Here, he demonstrates his realisation that violence spawns violence and his evil actions must continue. He notes that being king is worthless if he is not safely king — that is, if he becomes a victim of regicide. After the first crime has been committed, other crimes must follow in order for him to retain his position. Interestingly, Macbeth fears Banquo, not Duncan’s sons. In particular, he seems disturbed by Banquo’s careful answers to his questions. He asserts that Banquo “hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour / To act in safety” (52–53). Banquo’s previous interaction with Macbeth could be described as safe if Banquo was considering killing Macbeth. Macbeth also notes in Banquo a “royalty of nature” (49). This line is significant because it continues the flattering portrait of Banquo and places him on the side of nature in opposition to Macbeth, whose deeds and ascension to the throne are unnatural. Banquo’s previous resolve to remain honorable casts doubt on any treacherous intentions. It further suggests that Macbeth’s fears of Banquo may be unfounded. Macbeth seems particularly distraught that, according to the prophecies, the murder of Duncan will benefit Banquo’s line rather than his own. (Macbeth, of course, has no son to assume the throne.) Macbeth laments that he has defiled his own mind for Banquo’s descendants. Macbeth’s soliloquy again shows his acute awareness of the consequences of his actions. “[R]ancours,” or spite, has filled his “vessel of . . . peace” (66). His ambition again controls him. He is not satisfied with being king but wants to produce a line of kings as well, despite the fact that he does not have any children. Though much of this play seems to be in praise of King James, Macbeth’s assertion that his actions enable Banquo’s descendants to become kings may implicate James. As we saw in the Introduction to Macbeth, James I tied his ancestry back to Banquo. If Macbeth’s assertion here is correct, then James held his royal position as a direct result of Macbeth’s act of regicide. The soliloquy reaches its climax as Macbeth invites fate into his “list” or enclosed ground (70). Macbeth determines to battle fate, to try to change the second prediction of the weird sisters. This implies that Macbeth believes he achieved the crown not through the witches’ prophecy but through his own actions. Interestingly, this assertion of free will makes Macbeth fully responsible for Duncan’s death by removing the explanation of fate as the cause of his crime. Macbeth’s final statement in the soliloquy — “champion me to the utterance” — also seems to indicate his decision to kill Banquo (71).

### Defying Prophecy

---

The soliloquy ends with the arrival of two murderers. Though the preceding speech seemed to indicate that Macbeth just now decided on a course of action (to get rid of Banquo), his first line to the murderers illustrates that he has been considering Banquo’s death for longer time. He has even previously spoken to these men, planting in them seeds of hatred for Banquo. Throughout their exchange, Macbeth persuades the two men to murder Banquo by accusing him of being the cause of their troubles. Macbeth tells them that Banquo’s “heavy hand hath bow’d you to the grave / And beggar’d yours for ever” (88–89). Interestingly, in telling the men that Banquo is responsible for their station in life, he also claims that they previously believed that Macbeth’s “innocent self” was responsible (78). These lines imply that Macbeth, before he succumbed to his ambition, helped thwart their questionable behavior. Macbeth asks the men if they believe in the Christian principle of loving their enemy. Their response is quite interesting; they assert that they are men. This exchange seems to place men in opposition to Christianity and may serve as a criticism of the masculine warrior society, where promotion is gained through violence. Macbeth next discusses the hierarchical structure of men, referring to ranks and file. (See the Introduction to Early Modern England for a discussion of the universal hierarchy.) By killing Duncan, Macbeth clearly violated that hierarchy. Here, he offers the same opportunity to transgress that hierarchy to the murderers.

### Distorted Logic

---

Interestingly, Macbeth’s strategy with the murderers is very similar to the one his wife used to convince him to kill Duncan. To spur the murderers into action, Macbeth questions their manhood and position in society. He insightfully plays to their own ambitions of increasing their station as well as proving their manhood. According to Macbeth’s disordered logic, killing Banquo, an innocent man, will prove that they are not “the worst rank of manhood” (102). The audience, of course, realises that killing an innocent man will prove exactly the opposite. Macbeth adds to the murderers’ incentive the promise of favour through his “love” (105). Macbeth also resembles his wife in this deed by planning the murder and arranging the time and place for it, though not directly committing it. The plan to kill Banquo is Macbeth’s first onstage act as king. Compare him to Duncan, who commanded a large army of valiant soldiers in his defense. Macbeth, in contrast, commands two murderers in order to protect himself from someone who has yet to perform an aggressive act against him. Furthermore, he includes Banquo’s son Fleance in the crime. He plans to kill two innocent men in order to feed his ambition. Macbeth accuses Banquo of plotting against his life (115–116), but the audience knows that this is not necessarily true. In light of Banquo’s previous resolve to retain his honor, it seems even more unlikely. Macbeth’s last line, about Banquo’s soul finding heaven, echoes the line about Duncan’s soul immediately prior to his murder (I.1.64). Despite his descent into tyranny and the knowledge that he is sacrificing his own salvation, Macbeth remains concerned with the afterlife.

## Act 3, Scene 2

---

Macbeth and his wife discuss the necessity of murdering Banquo. Lady Macbeth is reluctant to add another murder to those already committed. Macbeth does not tell his wife that he has already given orders to have Banquo and Fleance murdered.

Lady Macbeth is reflecting on her unhappiness wen Macbeth enters the room, speaking of his insecurity and tortured mind. They discuss the importance of hiding their anxieties at that evening’s banquet. Macbeth hints at his plan to murder Banquo but does not disclose any details.

### “Doubtful Joy”

In the opening lines, Lady Macbeth acknowledges that she and her husband have not gained any happiness even though their desires to be king and queen have been met. She also begins to see more fully the consequences of their actions. She laments their “doubtful joy” — their fear that they themselves will be the victims of usurpers (7). Upon Macbeth’s arrival, she tries to reassert her pragmatism. She argues that brooding over their acts will not bring them any peace. Although she voices a resolute conviction that “what’s done is done,” we know from her previous lines that she realises that this is not the case (12). Also, notice that she misinterprets her husband’s behavior. He is no longer brooding over their past crimes but plotting future ones. This lack of insight stands in contrast to Lady Macbeth’s first appearance, when she accurately predicted his thoughts and apprehensions. This scene indicates the gulf that is widening between them. Responding to his wife’s assertion with his rational knowledge that he must continue the violence in order to maintain the throne, Macbeth invokes the metaphor of the snake. The traditional metaphor associates the snake with the devil, so the image is an interesting one for Macbeth to choose. This choice seems to be an attempt to place himself on the side of good, even though his later lines in this scene acknowledge his relationship to evil. During this response, Macbeth also echoes his wife’s lines with his envy for the dead who are safe and free from torment. He notes that treason has done all it can to Duncan. The bitter irony is that the same treason is not finished torturing Macbeth. The disparity between illusion and reality reappears when Macbeth recommends that they use their faces to mask their hearts; they cannot let Banquo know their murderous plans. The roles of Macbeth and his wife have now reversed; he serves as the driving force in their continued course of evil.

## Act 3, Scene 3

---

The sun has just set. The two murderers together with a third man (unknown) are waiting in a park to attack Banquo. They hear the sound of horses as Banquo and Fleance approach. The riders dismount and begin to walk towards the castle. They are attacked; Banquo is killed but Fleance manages to escape.

The Murderers ambush Banquo and Fleance, who are riding back to Macbeth’s castle. Murderers kill Banquo and Fleance escapes.

Despite its brevity, this scene is very important to the play because it reminds the reader of the theatrical nature of the text. With its emphasis on lightness and darkness as well as its action, the scene is much richer visually than textually. Similar to the special effects of modern movies, the assassination of Banquo is a spectacle designed to thrill the audience. This is also the first time that the violence in this play occurs onstage. All of the other deaths transpire out of the audience’s view. Why might Shakespeare have chosen this scene to be dramatised? What is the effect of having this scene as the first onstage violence? The presence of the third murderer is an excellent indicator of Macbeth’s increasing paranoia. He sends a third murderer to ensure that the first two carry out the murders. He does not seem to trust anyone. Keep in mind that he refused to inform Lady Macbeth of his plans in the previous scene. Many readers and critics question the identity of the third murderer, speculating that he (or she) may have been one of the major characters in disguise. No textual evidence exists to support this conjecture. Notice that although Banquo is killed, Fleance escapes; thus, Macbeth’s plan to defy the witches’ prophecy fails. Literally carrying the torch when he flees, Fleance allows darkness to consume the scene. Moreover, the connection between Fleance and light symbolically opposes the connection between Macbeth and darkness.

## Act 3, Scene 4

---

The banquet has been prepared in the castle hall. As soon as the guests have arrived and have been welcomed by Macbeth, one of the murderers appears at a side door. Macbeth learns from him of Banquo’s death and Fleance’s escape. Macbeth panics about Fleance’s escape and worries about the prophecy. Macbeth then turns to greets his guests. Although he knows that Banquo is dead, he accuses his former friend of unkindness for not coming to the feast. It is at this point that Banquo’s ghost appears and sits in Macbeth’s place at the table. None of the others present at the banquet can see the ghost. When Macbeth address it in terror his wife tries to excuse his behaviour as a fit. The ghost disappears but as soon as Macbeth is terrified, the feast ends in disorder, and the guests leave. Once Macbeth and his wife are alone they discuss Banquo. However, Macbeth’s attention soon turns to the man he now considers to be the most dangerous to him; Macduff.

### External and Internal Order

---

With the first lines, Macbeth attempts to impose order by commanding the thanes to sit according to their rank. Ironically, in his attempts to ingratiate himself to these thanes, he disrupts the order by being the “humble host” and sitting “i’ the midst” of them (4, 10). Macbeth’s own mental order is disturbed a few lines later when he learns of Fleance’s escape. He descends back into disorder as he begins to sense his inability to contradict the prediction of the weird sisters. Fleance’s escape preempts the security that he felt Banquo’s death would bring him. Notice the reference to the “casing,” or, encompassing, air of the castle, which echoes Duncan’s arrival to Macbeth’s castle in the first act (23). After hearing the murderer’s report, Macbeth asks, “But Banquo’s safe?” (25). Macbeth is not asking whether Banquo escaped the attack with his life; he asks whether Banquo is now incapable of causing him any further problems. Interestingly, he again refers to Banquo and Fleance by using snake metaphors, which are traditionally associated with the devil.

### Banquo’s Ghost Joins the Feast

---

The ghost of Banquo enters the scene and sits in Macbeth’s seat. Literally, the ghost may have chosen his seat according to Banquo’s rank. (Remember that Macbeth was not sitting in the king’s accustomed position.) The ghost’s choice of seats is symbolic, as well. Despite being dead, Banquo fills Macbeth’s place — that is, his offspring, not Macbeth’s, will be future kings. Macbeth’s question — “Which of you have done this?” — implies that he may believe he is seeing Ban

quo’s corpse rather than his ghost (49). Macbeth thinks that what he sees is reality. But no one else sees the ghost, suggesting that it may be an illusion. Most likely, in an Early Modern production, the ghost would have been visible to the audience whereas Macbeth’s earlier hallucination of the dagger would not have been. At this point, the relationship between appearance and reality falls apart, even for the audience. Sidney Lamb asserts that this confusion could be an allusion to King James’s work on witches, called Daemonologie, which contends that ghosts were punishment for the guilty or faithless. That would explain why Macbeth can see the ghost but none of his guests can. It does not explain, however, why Lady Macbeth cannot see the ghost. Though she is not specifically guilty of Banquo’s death, she does seem faithless. Traditional belief at the time assumed that a ghost would bleed profusely in the presence of its killer. Thus, this scene may have been quite gory on the stage. Unlike modern plays, the printed texts of Shakespeare’s play contain very few stage directions. Some aspects of performance can be located in internal stage directions. A good example of this type of direction occurs when Macbeth addresses the ghost. He tells him not to “shake [his] gory locks” (51). This indicates that the ghost shook his head in response to Macbeth’s initial question. These clues are invaluable for helping to determine what transpired onstage during an Early Modern production of one of Shakespeare’s plays.

### Questioning Macbeth’s Manhood

---

From Lady Macbeth’s question to her husband, “Are you a man?” (58) to Macbeth’s lines that end with “Than such a murder is” (82), Macbeth and his wife are having a private conversation that the thanes cannot hear. Note that she facilitates this conversation by telling the thanes to ignore Macbeth. This would have been accomplished onstage by having the couple move to a remote portion of the stage, probably toward the front. This position would allow the audience members to hear their dialogue while creating the illusion that the dinner guests cannot. During this private conversation, Lady Macbeth again raises the question of masculinity by associating her husband’s reaction to the ghost with a “woman’s story at a winter’s fire” (65). She equates the ghost to the “air-drawn dagger” Macbeth saw earlier, but Early Modern audiences may not have agreed with her criticism (62). To many of Shakespeare’s contemporaries, the ghost would be viewed not as an hallucination but as a “real” spirit. Though Macbeth attempts to recover from the fit that the ghost creates in him, each return of the ghost upsets him anew. Interestingly, Macbeth seems to be most concerned that the ghost is interrupting his attempts to secure the support of the thanes. The ghost’s numerous entrances and exits disrupt Macbeth and send the banquet into disorder. Macbeth manages to force the ghost to disappear, but disorder has already ruined his feast. In line 99, Macbeth’s challenge to the ghost — “[w]hat man dare, I dare” — echoes an earlier line in the play, “I dare do all that may become a man” (I.7.46). Both of these lines come in response to threats to his masculinity, indicating Macbeth’s sensitivity to threats and implications that he is not a “man.” Like the weird sisters earlier in the play, the ghost of Banquo vanishes by means of a trapdoor in the floor of the stage. Note that the ghost’s final departure returns Macbeth’s masculinity to him.

### The Feast Disbands

---

The feast is so disorderly that Lady Macbeth dismisses the custom of leaving according to rank and asks the thanes to depart at once. Remember that Macduff is the only living thane who does not attend the required feast. This absence, as we shall see, will be very costly to Macduff’s family. Macbeth’s paranoia causes him (rightly in this case) to suspect that Macduff’s absence is an act of defiance. This paranoia has led Macbeth to establish an extensive spy system, through paid servants, in every nobleman’s household. Macbeth’s lines end with an extremely important revelation that he has already committed too many crimes to turn back. His only choice, he claims, is to continue his violence and his tyranny. Keep in mind that in Holinshed’s account, Scotland enjoyed ten years of peaceful rule under Macbeth. Here, it seems to have only taken a matter of days for that peace to disintegrate. The scene ends on the question of reality versus illusion as Macbeth tries to convince himself that Banquo’s ghost was just an illusion. (These lines echo Banquo’s lines in Act I, Scene 3, where he suggests that the weird sisters may have been illusions.) Macbeth consoles himself with the notion that because he is a beginner in evil, it will get easier as he continues.

## Act 3, Scene 5

---

Hecate, the goddess of witchcraft, scolds the three witches  for not consulting her and dealing with one, i.e. Macbeth, who has no real interest in their “art”. She tells them to meet her in the morning when Macbeth will come to ask them more questions about the future. This scene is generally not thought to have written by Shakespeare.

### Confusion

Many critics argue that this scene is out of line with the progression of the play and was most likely added at a later date (around 1609) by playwright Thomas Middleton. The additions likely were made to capitalise as much as possible on the interest in witches and to take advantage of mechanical devices available in the private, indoor theaters. Although Shakespeare may not have been its author, do not dismiss this scene as unimportant. Its addition may reflect Early Modern dramatic tastes, and it draws attention to the highly collaborative nature of the theatre that many scholars and critics have glossed over in the past. This scene does include some of the themes that Shakespeare would have engaged. Specifically, Hecate’s disapproval of the weird sisters’ meddling with Macbeth highlights an important aspect of Macbeth’s character. Hecate asserts that Macbeth “[l]oves for his own ends” (13). Macbeth’s self-centered ambitions and desires prevent him from being loyal to anyone but himself; he is not even loyal to those who aided in the fulfillment of those ambitions. Hecate is right, of course. Macbeth has already attempted to defy the sisters’ prophecy by trying to destroy Banquo’s line. Hecate informs the audience of a plan to fool Macbeth with a false sense of security that will eventually cause his downfall. Though some scholars argue that this scene is pointless, it explains Hecate’s motivation. Evil forsakes Macbeth because of his selfish ambition.

### Act 3, Scene 6

---