# Macbeth - Summary of Act 4
#Summary #English 

## Act 4, Scene 1

---

The witches are making a charm when Macbeth arrives and demands to know his future. Three apparitions make favourable predictions for Macbeth, and when Macbeth further demands to know whether Banquo’s descendants will ever rule in Scotland, he is presented with a line of kings all descending from Banquo himself. The Witches vanish and Lennox arrives with news that Macduff has fled to England.

In this first scene, the weird sisters and Hecate reappear, continuing the strong supernatural presence in the play. As in Act I, Scene 3, the witches give prophetic information to Macbeth that shapes his course of action throughout the rest of the play. Keep in mind the differences between the prophesies delivered in the first act and this scene, the ways they are delivered, and the interaction between the witches and Macbeth in these two scenes. Consider what these differences say about Macbeth and the witches’ role in his behavior. Notice how these changes affect our perception of Macbeth and our level of sympathy for him.

### Calling on the Spirits

---

In the first three lines of this scene, the witches are listening to their spirits (sometimes called familiars), who often inform them when it is time to commit evil. The unnaturalness of the witches is visibly represented through their appearance, textually represented through their speech, and dramatically represented through the colorful contents of their cauldron. Shakespeare used many sources, including News from Scotland and King James’s Daemonologie, to create the list of ingredients that the witches put into their brew. Interestingly, dramatic portrayals of witches have not changed much in the centuries since Shakespeare wrote Macbeth. Today’s witches may use more disturbing ingredients in their brews, such as human body parts, but it is not uncommon to see modern portrayals of witches using “eye of newt and toe of frog” — many times copying Shakespeare’s exact language (14). Many scholars think that Hecate’s reappearance at this point is again the work of playwright Thomas Middleton. Notice that Hecate stays onstage but does not participate in the action for about a hundred lines. This awkward presence without dialogue seems to indicate that her character was a later addition that was not completely integrated into the text. Again, the song the witches sing does not appear in its entirety in the Folio text. It was common practice in Early Modern dramatic texts to include only the title of a song, because most of the readers of such a text were already familiar with it.

### Macbeth seeks a new prophecy

---

Notice the urgency with which Macbeth addresses the witches. He demands answers to his fearful questions. He now needs their information and wants it despite what harm and destruction it causes. He actually invites disorder and the destruction of religion (“pyramids”) and political states (“palaces”) (57). His villainy seems to be on the verge of madness. Macbeth is given the choice of hearing the prophecy from the weird sisters or seeing it from their masters, presumably Hecate and the Devil. He chooses to learn his fate directly from the sisters’ masters saying, “Call ’em: let me see ’em” (63). Macbeth is unable to process the apparitions alone, so the illusions speak to him as well. Holinshed’s account of this story includes the basic prophetic statements but does not include the apparitions. Deviating from the Chronicles allows Shakespeare to further explore the theme of illusion versus reality. The apparitions are at once illusions and representatives of Macbeth’s future reality. They speak truthfully, but their words are so carefully chosen that they convince Macbeth that any threat against him is an illusion. He is unable to interpret them accurately, so he cannot distinguish where illusion ends and reality begins. They lull Macbeth into a false confidence. The addition of the apparitions is also linked to the medium in which Shakespeare wrote, because these “illusions” would have been relatively easy to stage and their presence would add to the spectacle of the play. The presence of a trapdoor on the Early Modern stage would allow the apparitions to ascend and descend. (See the “Introduction to Early Modern England” for a discussion of this theatrical device.)

### The Apparitions Speak

---

The first apparition that Macbeth sees is an “armed Head.” By armed, Shakespeare indicates that the head is probably wearing a helmet. The apparition warns Macbeth to “beware Macduff” (71), confirming Macbeth’s fear that Macduff will be his downfall. Notice how quickly Macbeth dismisses the first prophecy upon hearing the second. A bloody child appears and tells him that no man “of woman born / Shall harm Macbeth” (80–81). Macbeth instantly feels that he has no reason to fear Macduff, saying “[t]hen, live” (82). But Macbeth quickly changes his mind again, saying that he will “make assurance double sure” by eliminating Macduff anyway (83). Macbeth’s responses to the prophecies he receives have been very curious throughout the play. On the one hand, he believes the prophecies are true, but on the other, he thinks that he can change or ignore them to suit his ambitions and alleviate his fears. This dual reaction continues here. The third apparition is a child with a crown who holds a tree. The child declares that “Macbeth shall never vanquish’d be until / Great Birnam Wood to high Dunsinane Hill / Shall come against him” (92–94). Macbeth again takes comfort in the seeming impossibility of a moving forest. He interprets this vision as an indication that he is invincible. Despite all of the disorder that his actions cause — disorder that he embraces (consider his initial lines in this scene) — Macbeth returns to the natural order of the world when he craves security. He cannot imagine a man who is not born of a woman. He also cannot imagine a forest that can move. Notice how equivocation, which Macbeth previously used for his own advantage, is being used here to dupe him. As we shall see, the statements made by the apparitions are true — from a certain perspective.

### A Final Vision

---

Despite being thrilled by the “[s]weet bodements” or predictions offered by the first three apparitions, Macbeth is still concerned about Banquo’s descendants becoming kings (96). Against the weird sisters’ warnings, he demands to know if Banquo’s prophecy will hold true. A final apparition — a procession of eight kings — appears. The glass that the eighth king holds is not a drinking cup but rather a looking glass or a mirror that, Macbeth tells us, reflects the future kings descending from Banquo’s line. The eight kings represent the entire history of Scottish kings up through Shakespeare’s day. The only omission is Mary, Queen of Scots. Scholars speculate that Shakespeare may have omitted her because of her gender or her Catholic religion. The eighth king is, of course, James VI and I, King of Scotland, and England. The multiple insignia and sceptres that Macbeth sees some of them carrying refer to multiple realms. For example, James ruled England and Scotland but also had France in his title (though not really under his control). This procession is clearly meant to be a tribute to James and the entire Stuart dynasty. This final apparition carries no prophetic statement; it merely confirms the earlier prophecy that the weird sisters gave to Banquo. Macbeth can interpret this vision himself. Because Fleance survived Macbeth’s plot to murder him, Banquo’s line lives on, and Macbeth’s fears are justified.

## Act 4, Scene 2

---

Ross tries to persuade Lady Macduff that her husband’s flight from Scotland to England was not a bad action. She is not convinced that Macduff has acted in the best interests of his family. Ross goes, leaving her with her son.

A messenger arrives to warn them that they are in deadly danger, Before she can make arrangements to flee the castle, the murderers arrive and kill everyone.

### Traitorous Fear

---

Lady Macduff’s first comments indicate the paranoia that grips Scotland. She notes that her husband is not a traitor in action, but his fear (which caused him to run) makes him one. Her statement is ironic, because Macbeth’s fears of Macduff have convinced him that Macduff is a traitor. Notice that Lady Macduff, like Lady Macbeth, questions her husband’s masculinity by accusing him of being a coward for abandoning his wife and children. At the same time Macduff is developing into the “hero” who will save Scotland from Macbeth, he is accused by his wife of being unnatural or out of order because he lacks “the natural touch” to defend his children (9). The owl that Lady Macduff refers to in line 11 symbolically represents Macbeth. (Recall the frequent references to the owl that surround Duncan’s murder in Act II, Scene 2.) The owl also foreshadows the horror at the end of this scene. Ross provides another picture of the current state of affairs in Scotland. He invokes the cliché that things can get only better because they are currently at their worst. Ross claims that if he stays, he will weep and disgrace his manhood, as well as make Lady Macduff uncomfortable. Thus, he abandons the Macduff family in the name of masculinity. The effect of this action seems to be a piercing criticism of masculinity, in addition to being another sign of the extent of the disorder in Scotland.

### “Whither should I fly?”

---

A messenger arrives to instruct Lady Macduff to flee from imminent danger. She refuses to do so, because she knows that she has done nothing to deserve punishment. But recognising that innocence does not guarantee her safety, Lady Macduff laments the world in which good and evil have been reversed. Her words echo the witches’ sentiment in the first act that “Fair is foul and foul is fair.” It is interesting that the murderer asks Lady Macduff the whereabouts of her husband, even though from the previous scene we know that Macbeth is aware of his location and absence from the castle. The dramatic presentation of the violence in this scene is significant. Except for Duncan’s murder, all of Macbeth’s tyrannical violence has been staged. The effect may be to distance the sympathy of the audience from Macbeth or to use that sympathy to implicate the audience in his actions. Either way, it causes us some discomfort. The first violent incident in the play depicted the murder of an innocent man (Banquo). This scene depicts the murder of a child. Notice that he is referred to as “egg” and “[y]oung fry” (79). Earlier, Lady Macbeth claimed that she could kill a child, but Macbeth, through his commands, actually does. Macbeth’s violent actions become steadily more evil and senseless. Duncan’s murder, though clearly wrong, provided Macbeth with real and immediate political benefits. Banquo’s murder was also committed in the name of political gain, even though he posed no current threat and was innocent. By the time we arrive at the murder of Macduff’s family, Macbeth’s violence seems to lack any real purpose or goal. Shakespeare also creates a great deal of suspense by having Lady Macduff flee, pursued by the murderers. It is unclear to the first-time audience member or reader whether or not she escapes. The scene ends without that resolution.

## Act 4, Scene 3

---

Macduff has found Malcolm at the palace of Edward the Confessor, King of England. He tries to persuade Malcolm to return to Scotland with an army to overthrow Macbeth. But Malcolm is suspicious that Macbeth might have sent Macduff to lure him into a trap. To test Macduff, Malcolm pretends that, if he were to become king of Scotland, he would be an even worse tyrant than Macbeth. Macduff eventually convinces Malcolm of his loyalty. Ross arrives with the news that Macduff’s family have all been murdered. Macduff then vows that he will not rest until Macbeth has been killed.

### The reconciliation of Malcolm and Macduff

---

Though they are on the same “side” against Macbeth, notice the immediate disagreement between Malcolm and Macduff. Malcolm wants to discuss and weep over the past. In contrast to Malcolm’s desire for words, Macduff calls for action, asserting that there is no time to waste. Keep this disagreement in mind as the scene closes; consider whether the two men still hold their respective positions at the end of the scene. For the next 100 or so lines, Malcolm tests Macduff’s loyalty. Malcolm is understandably suspicious of anyone from Scotland. Specifically, he fears that Macduff will use him as a tool to win Macbeth’s favor. Duncan’s son is concerned about the imperial influence on Macduff. Because the king is considered God’s appointed deputy on Earth, any treason (even against a tyrannical king) is a violation of God’s will as well as politically unlawful. Notice that Macduff circumvents this by repeatedly noting that Malcolm, not Macbeth, is the rightful king. Malcolm also echoes his father (I.4.11–14) in his recognition that the face does not always accurately represent the heart. Notice that he adopts a more pessimistic stance and extends it by asserting that all foul things look like grace. The clothing metaphor reappears in Macduff’s speech as he speaks of “wear[ing]” wrong (33). Around line 47, Malcolm starts to test Macduff by pretending to be capable of much worse tyranny than Macbeth. Many scholars and critics are dissatisfied with this interchange and argue that it is out of character for Malcolm and does not make logical sense. It is also quite extensive, consisting of about 70 lines and ending on line 113. This dialogue is taken very closely from Holinshed’s Chronicles with only minor changes. Those dissatisfied by this section of the scene seem to be especially bothered by Macduff’s unconvincing arguments. Such critics assert that it is not clear why Malcolm’s suspicions would be alleviated by Macduff’s statements that Scotland has enough willing “dames” and “foisons” (abundant supplies) to satisfy Malcolm’s supposed tyranny (73, 88).

Remember that Malcolm, under the divine right theory of kingship, is the true king. For this reason, whatever tyranny he might inflict would not contradict this because God cannot be wrong. A rightful tyrant would restore the order that a usurping or, in Macduff’s terms, an “untitled” tyrant disrupts (104). Starting in line 114, Malcolm indicates that he is finally convinced of Macduff’s loyalty and informs him of the plans to invade Scotland with the help of Old Siward, the Earl of Northumberland and Commander of the English Army. Incidentally, King James was also a descendant of Old Siward, so this plot move deepens the play’s tribute to him. In this speech to Macduff, Malcolm relates his virtues, one of which is his inexperience with women. Chastity was considered a great virtue in men and women.

### A representation of England and Edward the Confessor

---

This section of the scene helps to establish the dichotomy of good versus evil through the contrasting pairs of England versus Scotland and Edward versus Macbeth. The entrance of the doctor marks the transition to this second section. It is significant that the doctor portrays Edward as a healer. Macbeth, of course, is the exact opposite — a killer. The tradition of a king’s touch being able to heal scrofula, also known as the “king’s evil,” began with Edward the Confessor (who reigned from 1042 to 1066) and lasted until 1719. Scrofula is an enlargement of the neck glands that is also accompanied by a discharge of pus and scarring. Edward had white hair and an extremely fair complexion, and Lamb even suggests that he may have been an albino. Early Modern audiences may have been aware of his light complexion. Thus, visually, Edward is associated with whiteness, holiness, and purity, and Macbeth, as we have seen, is associated with blackness and unholiness. Sidney Lamb points out that while Queen Elizabeth I embraced this tradition of healing, James initially perceived it as superstitious and refused to perform it. Lamb suggests that this mention of the king’s touch could be a public recognition of James’s willingness to please the desires of his people. Furthermore, there is a symbolic connotation to this portrayal as well, because Edward will literally help cure Scotland of its evil — Macbeth. Malcolm’s description of his time in England and his personal testimony of Edward’s healing powers demonstrates the order and peace of England, which stands in contrast to the disorder and mayhem of Scotland. With the help of ordered and peaceful England, Macduff and Malcolm will save their country. It is significant that these two men are unable to stop Macbeth without the help of the English. James’s arrival in England, three years before the composition of Macbeth, was accompanied by an anti-Scottish sentiment due to the influx of Scottish nobility into the English court and the different ways in which the affairs of court and state were conducted. It seems unlikely that the portrayal of England as superior to Scotland is coincidental. This portrayal may be part of the implicit criticism of James and kingship that some critics have located in the play.

### Recent events in Scotland

---

The distinction between England and Scotland is brought into sharp view with the arrival of Ross and his account of recent events in Scotland. Ross’s first lines describe Scotland as “poor” and “afraid to know itself” (164–165). Compare the country’s lack of self-knowledge to Macbeth’s “To know my deed ‘twere best not to know myself” (II.2.73) and Ross’s “we are traitors / and do not know ourselves” (IV.1.19). What are the implications of fearing to know oneself? Ross brings the dreadful news of the events at Macduff’s castle. Shakespeare draws out the suspense of Act IV, Scene 2 through Ross’s reluctance to relate the full events. Though we may initially be consoled by Ross’s indication that Macduff’s wife is well, his next line claims that Macduff’s children are also well. The audience is aware that the latter is not true but cannot be sure of the former. Ross also equivocates when he tells Macduff that his family was “well at peace when I did leave ‘em” (179). This statement is true but misleading. It merely draws out the suspense. Notice that the suspense in the audience is greater than Macduff’s, because we know that his son was killed but do not know whether or not the rest of his family escaped. This is a good example of how Shakespeare draws the audience’s emotions into the play. Furthermore, compare Ross’s words that equate death with peace to Macbeth’s acknowledgment that Duncan can no longer be hurt (III.2.22–26) and Lady Macbeth’s assertion that “‘Tis safer to be that which we destroy” (III.2.6–7). This suspense lasts for approximately 30 lines. We finally learn that Macduff’s entire household was killed. In Early Modern England, servants were considered part of the family and, therefore, their deaths would have been difficult to hear of as well. Ross claims that this act was committed as a way of killing Macduff through grief. Imagine how powerful that grief must be and listen for it in the rest of Macduff’s lines. Ross puns on the word “deer” in line 206. Literally, this word refers to the game animal and metaphorically fits with Ross’s use of “quarry.” The pun is, of course, on “dear” — all that were “dear” to Macduff were killed. Once again, grief is associated with being unmanly. Malcolm tells Macduff to “[d]ispute” or resist his grief “like a man” (219). But there seems to be a double meaning in this line; Malcolm could be saying to dispute the murder of his family like a man — that is, by helping to conquer Macbeth. Macduff’s response is interesting in that he acknowledges the need to grieve; he says that he “must also feel it as a man” (221). A few lines later, however, he equates tears with being womanly by saying one of his options is to become a woman with his eyes. The other option is to destroy Macbeth. Macduff chooses to seek revenge, which Malcolm describes as a “manly” tune (235). This implies that grief is best felt through violence in this definition of masculinity. The need for violence and the inability to cry may be an implicit criticism of that masculinity. The lengthy discussion of this scene draws to a close with the call to action that will consume the fifth act.